Kate Middleton 'Doing Well' amid Recovery as Prince William Pulls Out of Royal Outing Last Minute
The Princess of Wales has been recuperating at home since leaving the hospital following her abdominal surgery of Jan. 16

By Simon Perry  Updated on February 27, 2024 11:36AM EST
Trending Videos
Close this video player
Catherine, Princess of Wales 
Kate Middleton. PHOTO: CHRIS JACKSON/GETTY 
Kate Middleton is "doing well" amid her recovery from recent abdominal surgery, as her husband Prince William makes a last-minute decision to pull out of an appearance.

On Tuesday, William was forced to pull out of attending a memorial service honoring his godfather King Constantine of Greece due to a personal matter. While Kensington Palace didn't indicate whether William's absence was due to Kate's recovery, a palace source tells PEOPLE she "continues to be doing well."

William, 41, had been scheduled to arrive at St. George's Chapel at Windsor Castle on Tuesday for the tributes to his late godfather. William, 41, informed the Greek royals that he would be unable to attend.

The prince was expected to give a reading at the event. It is understood that the personal matter that caused William to miss the service is not connected to his father King Charles' health. Charles, 75, is being treated for cancer and has canceled most public duties.
 A Complete Timeline of Kate Middleton's Abdominal Surgery and Recovery
Prince William, Prince of Wales and Catherine, Princess of Wales visits Fitzalan High School as she celebrates the beginning of Black History Month on October 03, 2023 in Cardiff, Wales
Prince William and Princess Kate in Cardiff, Wales in October 2023. CHRIS JACKSON/GETTY IMAGES
Princess Kate’s surgery was announced in a statement by Kensington Palace on Jan. 17. "The surgery was successful, and it is expected that she will remain in hospital for ten to fourteen days, before returning home to continue her recovery," the statement read. "Based on the current medical advice, she is unlikely to return to public duties until after Easter."
"The Princess of Wales appreciates the interest this statement will generate. She hopes that the public will understand her desire to maintain as much normality for her children as possible; and her wish that her personal medical information remains private," the statement continued. "Kensington Palace will, therefore, only provide updates on Her Royal Highness’ progress when there is significant new information to share." PEOPLE understands that the issue was non-cancerous.

William, Prince of Wales and Catherine, Princess of Wales, known as the Duke and Duchess of Rothesay when in Scotland, visit Outfit Moray, an award-winning charity delivering life-changing outdoor learning and adventure activity programmes to young people on November 02, 2023 in Moray, Scotland
Prince William and Princess Kate in Scotland in November 2023. JANE BARLOW - WPA POOL/GETTY IMAGES
William briefly returned to public duties that had been postponed due to his wife’s illness on Feb. 7. The appearances also marked William resuming royal duty for the first time since his father King Charles’ cancer diagnosis was revealed on Feb. 5.

A friend told PEOPLE of William's return to public life, "He is coping remarkably well considering his wife had surgery and he only found out his father’s news recently.”

Tuesday's service was for King Constantine, who was the last King of Greece and a close friend of the British royals. He died in January 2023 at age 82 and among the congregation for the service was Constantine's widow Queen Anne-Marie, and their son Crown Prince Pavlos with his wife, Crown Princess Marie-Chantal.

 Prince William Apologizes for Kate Middleton Missing Awards amid Surgery Recovery: 'She Does Love the BAFTAs'
Can't get enough of PEOPLE's Royals coverage? Sign up for our free Royals newsletter to get the latest updates on Kate Middleton, Meghan Markle and more!
Queen Camilla arrives to attend a thanksgiving service for the life of King Constantine of the Hellenes, at St George's Chapel at Windsor Castle
Queen Camilla arriving at the service at Windsor Castle on Tuesday, February 27. ANDREW MATTHEWS/POOL/AFP VIA GETTY IMAGES
Queen Camilla formally led the British royal family, stepping in for her husband, King Charles, as he has canceled most public-facing duties. She was joined by family and friends, as well as royals from around the world, at the service. Among the members of the British royal family walking into St. George's Chapel on Tuesday morning were Prince Andrew and his ex-wife Sarah Ferguson, the Duchess of York, who live under the same roof at Royal Lodge, on the Windsor estate.