US 2024 presidential election: Consolidating his path, Trump wins South Carolina primary
You can share an article by clicking on the share icons at the top right of it. 
The total or partial reproduction of an article, without the prior written authorization of Le Monde, is strictly forbidden. 
For more information, see our Terms and Conditions. 
For all authorization requests, contact syndication@lemonde.fr. 

https://www.lemonde.fr/en/international/article/2024/02/25/us-2024-presidential-election-trump-wins-south-carolina-primary_6555804_4.html

US 2024 presidential election: Consolidating his path, Trump wins South Carolina primary
Donald Trump comfortably won South Carolina's Republican primary on Saturday, beating Nikki Haley in her home state and heading to a third straight GOP nomination. 'I'm not giving up,' said Haley.

Le Monde with AP
Published on February 25, 2024, at 1:09 am (Paris), updated on February 25, 2024, at 9:04 am 
Time to4 min.
Share

Republican presidential candidate and former President Donald Trump stands on stage as he hosts a South Carolina Republican presidential primary election night party in Columbia, South Carolina, on February 24, 2024. SHANNON STAPLETON / REUTERS
Donald Trump won South Carolina's Republican primary on Saturday, February 24, beating former UN Ambassador Nikki Haley in her home state and further consolidating his path to a third straight GOP nomination. Trump has now swept every contest that counted for Republican delegates, with wins already in Iowa, New Hampshire, Nevada and the US Virgin Islands. The former president's latest victory will likely increase pressure on Haley, who was Trump's former representative to the UN and South Carolina governor from 2011 to 2017, to leave the race.

A 2020 general rematch between Trump and President Joe Biden is becoming increasingly inevitable. Haley has vowed to stay in the race through at least the batch of primaries on March 5, known as Super Tuesday, but was unable to dent Trump's momentum in her home state despite holding far more campaign events and arguing that the indictments against Trump will hamstring him against Biden.


"I have never seen the Republican Party so unified as it is right now," Trump declared, taking the stage for his victory speech mere moments after polls closed.


Republican presidential candidate and former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley speaks on stage at her watch party during the South Carolina Republican presidential primary election in Charleston, South Carolina, U.S. February 24, 2024. REUTERS/Brian Snyder BRIAN SNYDER / REUTERS
Former South Carolina governor Nikki Haley vowed to fight on Saturday, underlining the steep climb she faces to capture the Republican presidential nomination. "I said earlier this week that no matter what happens in South Carolina, I would continue to run... I'm a woman of my word. I'm not giving up this fight when a majority of Americans disapprove of both Donald Trump and Joe Biden," she said.

Read more Subscribers only In South Carolina, Trump is gaining ground with college graduates
Reliable bellwether for Republicans
South Carolina's first-in-the-South primary has historically been a reliable bellwether for Republicans. In all but one primary since 1980, the Republican winner in South Carolina has gone on to be the party's nominee. The lone exception was Newt Gingrich in 2012. Haley said in recent days that she would head straight to Michigan for its Tuesday primary, the last major contest before Super Tuesday. She faces questions about where she might be able to win a contest or be competitive.


Trump and Biden are already behaving like they expect to face off in November. Trump and his allies argue Biden has made the US weaker and point to the chaotic withdrawal from Afghanistan and Russia's decision to launch a full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Trump has also repeatedly attacked Biden over high inflation earlier in the president's term and his handling of record-high migrant crossings at the US-Mexico border.

Trump has questioned – often in harshly personal terms – whether the 81-year-old Biden is too old to serve a second term. Biden's team in turn has highlighted the 77-year-old Trump's own flubs on the campaign trail.

Read more Biden sweeps South Carolina with 'loser' taunt at Trump
Biden has stepped up his recent fundraising trips around the country and increasingly attacked Trump directly. He's called Trump and his "Make America Great Again" movement dire threats to the nation's founding principles, and the president's reelection campaign has lately focused most of its attention on Trump suggesting he'd use the first day of a second presidency as a dictator and that he'd tell Russia to attack NATO allies who fail to keep up with defense spending obligations mandated by the alliance.

Partner service
Learn French with Gymglish
Thanks to a daily lesson, an original story and a personalized correction, in 15 minutes per day.
Try for free
Haley also criticized Trump on his NATO comments and also for questioning why her husband wasn't on the campaign trail with her – even as former first lady Melania Trump hasn't appeared with him. Maj. Michael Haley is deployed in the Horn of Africa on a mission with the South Carolina Army National Guard.

Lukewarm feelings about NATO and Ukraine aid
But South Carolina's Republican voters line up with Trump on having lukewarm feelings about NATO and continued US support for Ukraine, according to AP VoteCast data from Saturday's primary. About 6 in 10 oppose continuing aid to Ukraine in its fight against Russia. Only about a third described America's participation in NATO as "very good," with more saying it's only "somewhat good."

Haley has raised copious amounts of campaign money and is scheduled to begin a cross-country campaign swing on Sunday in Michigan ahead of Super Tuesday on March 5, when many delegate-rich states hold primaries. But it's unclear how she can stop Trump from clinching enough delegates to become the party's presumptive nominee for the third time.


Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-SC, complimented Haley while speaking to reporters at Trump's election night party in Columbia but suggested it was time for her to drop out. "I think the sooner she does, the better for her, the better for the party," Graham said.

Trump's political strength has endured despite facing 91 criminal charges related to his efforts to overturn his 2020 election loss to Biden, the discovery of classified documents in his Florida residence and allegations that he secretly arranged payoffs to a porn actress.

First criminal trial on March 25
The former president's first criminal trial is set to begin on March 25 in New York, where he faces 34 counts of falsifying business records related to hush money paid to porn star Stormy Daniels in the closing weeks of his 2016 presidential campaign.

Read more Subscribers only 'With eight months to go before the US presidential election, announcing Donald Trump's victory is a lazy gamble'
Biden won South Carolina's Democratic primary earlier this month and faces only one remaining challenger, Dean Phillips. The Minnesota Democratic congressman has continued to campaign in Michigan ahead of the Democratic primary there, despite having little chance of actually beating Biden.


Though Biden is expected to cruise to his party's renomination, he faces criticism from some Democrats for providing military backing to Israel in its war against Hamas in the Gaza Strip. Some in his party support a ceasefire as the death toll in Israel's war has reached 30,000 people, two-thirds of them women and children. The war could hurt the president's general election chances in swing states like Michigan, which is home to a large Arab American population.

Read more Subscribers only 'It would be a mistake to take Donald Trump's rhetoric lightly'
Le Monde with AP