3/2/24, 1:43 PM William, prince of Wales -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/681346 1/5
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
Early life and education
Military career
Marriage and children
Later life
Prince William
Prince William during a visit
to Islamabad, Pakistan, 2019.
Princess Diana with Princes
Harry and William
Princess Diana with her sons,
Prince Harry (bottom) and Prince
William, 1987.
Princess Diana and Prince
Charles with their son Prince
William
The prince and princess of Wales
with their newborn son Prince
William outside St. Mary's Hospital,
London, June 1982.
William, prince of Wales
William, prince of
Wales (born June 21,
1982, Paddington,
London, England)
elder son of Charles
III and Diana,
princess of Wales,
and the heir apparent
to the British throne.
William is one of the most popular members of the British royal family, and he has come to
personify the modern monarchy.
Early life and education
William is the first British heir apparent born at a
hospital (St. Mary’s in London). His childhood also
differed from earlier royals. Most notably, he and his
younger brother, Prince Harry, were exposed to a
world beyond royal privilege by their mother, who
sought to give her sons a “normal” upbringing. As a
result, the boys took public transportation, went to fast
food restaurants, and visited homeless shelters and
orphanages. William received his early education at
Wetherby School in London and later attended
Ludgrove School in Berkshire (1990–95) and Eton
College in Windsor (1995–2000).
After a tumultuous marriage, William’s parents
divorced in 1996. The following year, Princess Diana
died in a car crash in Paris. William, who was 15
years old, was admired for his public poise and grace
in the wake of her death. The image of him and 12-
year-old Harry walking solemnly behind Diana’s
casket as it was carried through the streets
of London did much to endear the brothers to the British public. While William rarely
3/2/24, 1:43 PM William, prince of Wales -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/681346 2/5
funeral of Princess Diana
(From left) Prince Charles (later
Charles III), Prince Harry, Charles
Spencer, Prince William, and Prince
Philip with Princess Diana's coffin as it
arrives at Westminster Abbey, London,
September 6, 1997.
Princes Harry, Charles, and
William
Prince Charles (later Charles III)
flanked by his two sons, Prince Harry
(left) and Prince William, 2005.
Prince William
Prince William, 2008.
spoke publicly about his mother’s death, he stated in a
speech during a tour of Scotland in 2021 that
“Scotland is the source of some of my happiest
memories. But also, my saddest. I was in Balmoral
when I was told that my mother had died.” He went
on to note that he found solace in the Scottish
outdoors.
In 2000 William was accepted to the University of St.
Andrews in Scotland, but he opted to defer enrollment
to take a gap year. Having been exposed to charitable
activities early in his life by his mother, he
volunteered in Chile. He also worked at a British
dairy farm and visited Belize and countries in Africa.
In 2001 he enrolled at St. Andrews, where he studied
art history and, later, geography. William graduated
four years later.
Military career
In 2006 William entered the Royal Military Academy
Sandhurst. Despite his willingness to join British
forces in Iraq, military officials suggested that neither
William nor Harry should serve there, because they
could become specific targets of attack, thereby
putting their fellow soldiers at risk (Harry later served
two tours of duty in Afghanistan). In 2008 William
went on attachment to the Royal Air Force and then to
the Royal Navy so he could gain experience in all
three major branches of the armed services. In 2010
he completed his training as a helicopter pilot in the RAF Search and Rescue Force and
began a tour of duty in Wales. He reportedly participated in more than 150 operations
before ending his military service in September 2013. William later served as an air
ambulance pilot from July 2015 to July 2017.
Marriage and children
In November 2010 it was announced that William would marry his longtime girlfriend,
Catherine (Kate) Middleton, whom he had met at St. Andrews. The royal wedding took
3/2/24, 1:43 PM William, prince of Wales -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/681346 3/5
Prince William and Catherine,
duke and duchess of
Cambridge
Prince William and his bride,
Catherine, leaving Westminster
Abbey after their wedding, April 29,
2011.
Prince William and Catherine,
duchess of Cambridge, with
their children
Prince William and Catherine, duke
and duchess of Cambridge (later
prince and princess of Wales), with
their children (from left) Prince
George, Princess Charlotte, and
Prince Louis on the balcony of
Buckingham Palace, London, June
5, 2022.
Elizabeth II, Prince William, and
Catherine, duchess of
Cambridge
Prince William (centre) and his wife,
Catherine, duchess of Cambridge
(right), with Queen Elizabeth II.
After Elizabeth's death in 2022,
Prince William's father ascended
place on April 29, 2011, at Westminster Abbey in
London. The couple’s first son, Prince George
Alexander Louis of Cambridge, was born on July 22,
2013. They subsequently had a daughter, Princess
Charlotte Elizabeth Diana of Cambridge (born May 2,
2015), and a second son, Prince Louis Arthur Charles
of Cambridge (born April 23, 2018).
Later life
William ranks among the most popular figures of the
royal family, known for his ease and relatability, traits
that his mother also possessed. In various ways,
William has sought to honour Princess Diana’s legacy.
In 2007 he and Harry organized a London memorial
service to mark the 10-year anniversary of her death.
The two later commissioned a statue of their mother,
and it was unveiled on the grounds of Kensington
Palace in 2021.
Much like his father, William is an avid sportsman
and an environmental activist. In 2020 he announced
the creation of the Earthshot Prize, which was
inspired by U.S. Pres. John F. Kennedy’s “Moonshot”
initiative to send a man to the Moon. It was to be
awarded in five categories over 10 years, and the goal
was to “repair the planet.” The first prizes were
presented in 2021.
While William has largely avoided the scandals that
plagued his parents, his relationship with Harry
became fodder for the tabloids beginning in 2020.
That year Harry and his wife, Meghan, duchess of
Sussex, announced that they would “step back” from
their royal duties. The brothers’ relationship became
increasingly strained, especially after Harry and
Meghan publicly criticized the royal family. During a
discussion about racism, Harry claimed that there was
3/2/24, 1:43 PM William, prince of Wales -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/681346 4/5
the British throne, becoming King
Charles III, and Prince William
became heir apparent.
Prince George Alexander Louis
of Cambridge
Prince William, duke of Cambridge
(later prince of Wales), and
Catherine, duchess of Cambridge
(later princess of Wales), arriving
with their first son, Prince George
Alexander Louis of Cambridge, at
Chapel Royal in St. James's Palace,
London, for the baby's christening,
2013.
Princess Charlotte Elizabeth
Diana of Cambridge
Catherine, duchess of Cambridge
(later princess of Wales), and
Prince William, duke of Cambridge
(later prince of Wales), with their
newborn daughter, Princess
Charlotte Elizabeth Diana of
Cambridge, at St. Mary's Hospital,
London, May 2, 2015.
Prince William
Prince William, 2011.
“a huge level of unconscious bias” among family
members. This came as the monarchy faced an
intensifying backlash over its colonial legacy of
exploitation, repression, and slavery. During a
Caribbean tour in 2022, William and Catherine
encountered protests as many countries in the region
considered removing the British monarch as head of
state. William later said that “racism…has no place in
our society.”
On September 8, 2022, Elizabeth II died, and Charles
became king. William became heir apparent and
inherited the title duke of Cornwall from his father,
who soon conferred the additional title prince of
Wales upon William.
The Editors of Encyclopaedia BritannicaThis article was most
recently revised and updated by Amy Tikkanen.
3/2/24, 1:43 PM William, prince of Wales -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/681346 5/5
Prince Harry, Prince William,
and Catherine, duchess of
Cambridge
Prince Harry (left) with Prince
William and the latter's wife,
Catherine, duchess of Cambridge,
2016.
Prince William
Prince William inspecting the Guard of
Honour at the Palace of
Holyroodhouse, Edinburgh, Scotland,
May 21, 2021.
Citation Information
Article Title: William, prince of Wales
Website Name: Encyclopaedia Britannica
Publisher: Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc.
Date Published: 29 February 2024
URL: https://www.britannica.comhttps://www.britannica.com/biography/William-prince-of-Wales
Access Date: March 02, 202
